---
layout: article
title: StratusLab Reference Cloud Infrastructure
category: try it
---

A StratusLab reference infrastructure is available and offers access to
external third parties in order to test and evaluate our cloud solution.
This infrastructure is built with the latest stable releases of the
StratusLab distribution and provides two types of cloud services:

The physical cloud-computing infrastructure is located in two sites

* Athens, Greece - operated by [GRNET][grnet] (cloud.grnet.stratuslab.eu)
* Paris, France - operated by [LAL][lal] (cloud.lal.stratuslab.eu)

The project's [Marketplace][marketplace], containing existing virtual
machine images metadata, is hosted by [Trinity College Dublin (TCD), Ireland][tcd].

Registration
------------

To register on the StratusLab Reference infrastructure please go to the 
[registration page][ref-infra-reg].

For user authentication two different mechanisms are supported

* Username/password pair generated by the StratusLab registration service
* Digital certificate issued by an [IGTF][igtf] accredited Certification
    Authority. In this case authentication can be done directly using this
    certificate or by generating a VOMS proxy certificate signed from the
    above.

During your enrollment you may chose either authentication method. For the
certificate based one, on the registration page you will have to provide 
Distinguished Name as it appears in your certificate.

Once your request is approved you will be sent an email with the details for
accessing the cloud service.

What I need to access the StratusLab reference cloud?
-----------------------------------------------------

You will need to [install the StratusLab client tools][user-client-install] 
that allow you to access remotely the cloud and to control the lifecycle of 
your Virtual Machine instances. They also allow you to create entries for the 
Marketplace, generate your own VM appliances based on pre-existing images which 
then can be reference from the Marketplace and instantiated in the cloud.

The endpoints for invoking the cloud services are 

* cloud.grnet.stratuslab.eu (compute/storage)
* cloud.lal.stratuslab.eu (compute), pdisk.lal.stratuslab.eu (storage)

To configure the above endpoints in the client tools see the
[user client installation instructions][user-client-install]. 

Which virtualization technologies do you use?
---------------------------------------------

The StratusLab distribution uses the [OpenNebula][one] toolkit for virtual
machine life-cycle management.
The client-side tools communicate with
the OpenNebula endpoint through the native XML-RPC protocol provided by the
service.

StratusLab, out-of-the-box, is certified for the KVM hypervisor.

What services are offered?
--------------------------

With StratusLab v2 you can instantiate and manage the lifecycle of virtual
machines, including volumes and basic network configuration (e.g. public,
private).

The [Marketplace][marketplace] is publicly accessible and offers
base OS images for various Linux distributions including:

* ttylinux
* CentOS
* Fedora
* Ubuntu

External users also have the ability to upload their own base
images and appliances to the repository. For instructions on how to prepare
your own appliance and upload it on the StratusLab Marketplace consult the
[documentation][documentation].

Users may instantiate VMs with the following predefined hardware 
profiles (default: m1.small):

      Type              CPU        RAM       SWAP
      c1.medium       1 CPU     256 MB    1024 MB
      c1.xlarge       4 CPU    2048 MB    2048 MB
      m1.large        2 CPU     512 MB    1024 MB
    * m1.small        1 CPU     128 MB    1024 MB
      m1.xlarge       2 CPU    1024 MB    1024 MB
      t1.micro        1 CPU     128 MB     512 MB

It is also possible to compose custom VM CPU/RAM/SWAP configurations.

On what physical infrastructure are the reference cloud services running?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

###GRNet

The cloud service is running on 16 dual quad core Intel Xeon E5520 nodes, with
HyperThreading enabled. One additional node is used as the service frontend.
In total, we provide 256 logical cores that can be used from by VM instances.
Each node is configured with 48 GByte main memory. The base OS we use is Linux
CentOS 6.3.

Storage is provided by a centralized storage server which currently serves a
total of 3 TByte of storage shared among all the nodes with NFSv3.

###LAL

TODO: Add info about LAL.

What is the firewall policy?
----------------------------

No firewall restrictions are applied externally to the VMs. All ports are open
for end-user applications. Users are responsible to configure their own port
restrictions inside the VM images and for the overall security of the image in
general.

What Quality of Service is provided?
------------------------------------

Currently the StratusLab cloud services are provided as is with no guarantees
about the availability and stability of the service. We are making the best
effort to provide a stable cloud infrastructure but at the moment we cannot
guarantee that a VM instance might not crash or temporarily be unavailable due
to a software or network problem.

How can I deploy my own cloud service?
--------------------------------------

You can use StratusLab distribution v2.x to deploy your own cloud services.
The software is open source and available from the project repositories.
Currently we support CentOS 6 Linux distribution and two modes of installation

* [Manual Installation][manual-install], or
* [Quattor][quattor].

How can I get more information and support?
-------------------------------------------

You should direct any inquiries related to the above services to
support@stratuslab.eu. Please use the same contact for reporting problems or
requesting any special arrangements for the cloud service setup. Notice that
as with the infrastructure itself the support services are currently provided
on best effort basis.

[grnet]: http://www.grnet.gr
[lal]: http://www.lal.in2p3.fr
[marketplace]: https://marketplace.stratuslab.eu
[tcd]: http://www.tcd.ie
[ref-infra-reg]: https://register.stratuslab.eu:8444/
[igtf]: http://www.igtf.net/
[user-client-install]: /install/2012/01/19/install-user-cli-installation.html
[get-started]: http://stratuslab.eu/doku.php/release:users
[one]: http://www.opennebula.org 
[documentation]: /documentation/
[manual-install]: /install/2012/09/25/install-cloud-services-installation.html
[quattor]: http://quattor.org/
