---
layout: article
title: StratusLab version 1.3 released
category: news
---

The StratusLab project is proud to announce the StratusLab 1.3 release. This
is an incremental release of the StratusLab distribution, the cloud computing
distribution designed for grid and cluster computing.

Key features of StratusLab v1.3
-------------------------------

  * Integrates OpenNebula version 3.0 which provides access to new features
  * Improvements in network bandwidth allocation to VMs
  * New stratus-connect-instance command allows users to connect directly to their VMs using the VM identifier
  * New Bioinformatics Virtual Appliances
  * Addition of PostgreSQL support to the StratusLab Marketplace
  * Bug-fixes and ongoing quality enhancements


Advanced Functionality with OpenNebula 3.0
------------------------------------------

StratusLab v1.3 is the first StratusLab release to fully integrate OpenNebula
3.0, which brings many advances over version 2.2 used by previous StratusLab
releases.

OpenNebula 3.0 is helping many organizations make the transition toward the
next generation of cloud infrastructures by supporting multiple fully-isolated
virtual data centers, advanced multi-tenancy with fine-grained access control,
and multiple zones potentially hosted in different geographical locations. The
new release also brings important benefits to cloud users and administrators
with a greatly improved SunStone GUI that provides easy access to all the new
features in 3.0 and a new oZones GUI to manage zones and virtual data centers.
Other features included in this release include new authentication methods
with usage quotas, a VM template repository, a new monitoring and accounting
service, and a new network subsystem with support for Open vSwitch and 802.1Q
tagging.

These features and more are now available to StratusLab users.

Get Started with StratusLab v1.3
--------------------------------

Check out the StratusLab Reference Infrastructure to try out a StratusLab
cloud, download the StratusLab Client interface tools [here][cli].


Install your own StratusLab cloud
---------------------------------

Resource providers install your own public or private cloud with StratusLab
1.3. Find all the documentation and instructions for downloading the software
[here][install].


Documentation and user support
------------------------------

Full documentation for the StratusLab distribution is available [here][docs].

You can also view and comment on the StratusLab project [roadmap][roadmap].

Please visit the [StratusLab User Forums][forum] where you can report
problems, give feedback and discuss StratusLab and Cloud-related issues with
StratusLab project members and users.

Alternatively, see our [support page][support], or contact
support@stratuslab.eu if you have questions or feedback on the StratusLab
distribution, or to get access to the StratusLab reference installation.

[cli]: http://stratuslab.eu/doku.php/release:users
[install]: http://stratuslab.eu/doku.php/release:providers
[docs]: http://stratuslab.eu/doku.php/documentation 
[roadmap]: http://stratuslab.eu/doku.php/roadmap:project_roadmap
[forum]: https://groups.google.com/a/stratuslab.eu/group/user-forum/topics
[support]: http://stratuslab.eu/doku.php/support 


