---
layout: article
title: StratusLab Version 2.1 Released
category: review
---

StratusLab announces version 2.1 of its IaaS cloud distribution.  This
release improves and streamlines the previous 2.0 release.  It has
been put together by the StratusLab collaboration that grew out of the
previous EC-funded project and that continues to evolve and support
the StratusLab cloud distribution.

Key features of StratusLab v2.1
-------------------------------

* Bug-fixes and enhancements to persistent disk support
* Support for new Operating Systems: OpenSuSE 12.1 and CentOS 6.2

Using a StratusLab Cloud
------------------------

The command line client and web interfaces for services are very
similar to previous releases.  For information about getting started,
see the ["Try It"][tryit] section of the website.

Installing a StratusLab Cloud
-----------------------------

Resource providers install your own public or private cloud with
StratusLab 2.1. Find all the documentation and instructions for
downloading and installing the software in the website "Install"
section.

Marketplace and Appliances
--------------------------

The StratusLab Marketplace lists ready-to-run virtual machine images,
prepared by the StratusLab collaboration and by others.  The
StratusLab images operating systems like ttylinux, CentOS,
ScientificLinux, Fedora, Ubuntu, and OpenSuSE.  

Other collaborations provide images for the UMD software, Globus
services, and bioinformatics appliances.  You can similarly provide
your images to share with others.

Explore the available images in the [Marketplace][marketplace].

Documentation and User Support
------------------------------

Full documentation for the StratusLab distribution is available
[here][docs].

Please visit the [StratusLab User Forums][forum] where you can report
problems, give feedback and discuss StratusLab and Cloud-related
issues with StratusLab project members and users.

Alternatively, see our [support page][support], or contact
support@stratuslab.eu if you have questions or feedback on the
StratusLab distribution, or to get access to the StratusLab reference
installation.

Components
----------

Deployment tools (stratuslab-cli-sysadmin)

* added possibility to separately and per component invoke
  installation, configuration and services startup. Run
  stratus-install -h to see all the options.
* dropped support of Claudia.
* dropped support of Webmonitor. Compute service can be monitored with
  OpenNebula Sunstone (set sunstone = True in configuration file and
  it will be configured and started along with --opennebula
  component).
* dropped support of Appliance Repository
* changes in stratuslab.cfg configuration file
 - 'centos' as default Linux distribution on Frontend and Nodes
 - /dev/pdisk is now default for persistent_disk_lvm_device
* various fixes to the set of the site functional tests via
  stratus-test

User command line interface (stratuslab-cli-user)

* added possibility to define VM disks bus type in image manifest
  during its generation with --disks-bus parameter. One has to be sure
  that the image supports the defined disks bus type and system is
  able to correctly mount all the provided disks by the respective
  device names/labels (e.g. via referencing in fstab).
* dropped support of Appliance Repository
* stratus-upload-image now uploads images to predefined Persistent
  Disk service instead of Appliance Repository. The location of the
  uploaded image gets added as location to the manifest, which then is
  uploaded to Marketplace. The command also allows to set the
  attributes of the uploaded image in the Persistent Disk service at
  the upload time.

Persistent Disk service (stratuslab-pdisk-server)

* fixed image upload
* improved robustness in update of iSCSI target daemon with newly
  added volumes

[install]: http://stratuslab.eu/install
[tryit]: http://stratuslab.eu/try
[marketplace]: https://marketplace.stratuslab.eu/
[docs]: http://stratuslab.eu/docs
[forum]: https://groups.google.com/a/stratuslab.eu/group/user-forum/topics
[support]: http://stratuslab.eu/about


