---
layout: article
title: StratusLab version 1.4 released
category: news
---

The StratusLab project is proud to announce the StratusLab 1.4 release. This
is an incremental release of the StratusLab distribution, the cloud computing
distribution designed for grid and cluster computing.

Key features of StratusLab v1.4
-------------------------------

* Bug-fixes and enhancements to persistent disk support
* Introduction of support for the Telefónica TCloud API which extends some of
  the main standards in cloud management, such as the OVF and vCloud
  specifications
* Support for new Operating Systems: OpenSuSE 12.1 and CentOS 6.2


Important notes for Upgrading from v1.3
---------------------------------------

Release 1.4 must be used with the StratusLab client version 1.21 distributed
with the release. Please upgrade your clients when you move to 1.4.

Before upgrading the pdisk service, you should back up the disk information in
/tmp/zookeeper. If you upgrade the service without rebooting the machine, then
the information will be moved from /tmp/zookeeper to /var/lib/zookeeper-pdisk
automatically. If you reboot the machine, you'll need to copy the backup
information into /var/lib/zookeeper-pdisk manually.

In addition to Fedora 14 packages, packages for OpenSuSE 12.1 and CentOS 6.2
are now also provided, please note however, that they have received less
testing than the standard Fedora 14 packages.

You can find more information on upgrading [here][upgrading].

Get Started with StratusLab v1.4
--------------------------------

Check out the StratusLab Reference Infrastructure to try out a StratusLab
cloud, download the StratusLab Client interface tools [here][cli].


Install your own StratusLab cloud
---------------------------------

Resource providers install your own public or private cloud with StratusLab
1.4. Find all the documentation and instructions for downloading the software
[here][install].


Explore the StratusLab Marketplace
----------------------------------

The StratusLab Marketplace provides ready-to-run virtual images and
appliances, which can be endorsed by various user communities, and allow you
to get up and running quickly on the Cloud. The Marketplace contains base
images for Fedora, Scientific Linux, OpenSuSE, Ubuntu, and ttylinux, as well
as a range of appliance images, such as the new UMD 1 images, Globus Toolkit
5.0.4 images, and a range of bioinformatics appliances. Virtual disks are also
available, containing the datasets for a particular user community.

To explore the available images visit the [Marketplace][marketplace].


Documentation and user support
------------------------------

Full documentation for the StratusLab distribution is available [here][docs].

Please visit the [StratusLab User Forums][forum] where you can report
problems, give feedback and discuss StratusLab and Cloud-related issues with
StratusLab project members and users.

Alternatively, see our [support page][support], or contact
support@stratuslab.eu if you have questions or feedback on the StratusLab
distribution, or to get access to the StratusLab reference installation.

[upgrading]: http://stratuslab.eu/doku.php/upgrade
[cli]: http://stratuslab.eu/doku.php/release:users
[install]: http://stratuslab.eu/doku.php/release:providers
[marketplace]: https://marketplace.stratuslab.eu/
[docs]: http://stratuslab.eu/doku.php/documentation 
[forum]: https://groups.google.com/a/stratuslab.eu/group/user-forum/topics
[support]: http://stratuslab.eu/doku.php/support 


