---
layout: article
title: StratusLab Release (13.10.0)
category: news
---

The 13.10.0 release of the StratusLab IaaS cloud distribution is
available.  This release incorporates a large number of bug fixes.  It
includes a prototype CIMI server and a fair number of code refactoring
to make the eventual transition seamless for users.

The command line client is backwards-compatible with previous
releases.  The preferred way to install the client is via pip for
individual installations; an RPM package is also supported for
system-wide installations.

Production sites should upgrade to this release.  It should require
only the installation of the updated packages.  Get the CentOS
packages from the [StratusLab yum repositories][sl-yum].

Next release is expected in the first part of December and will more
fully incorporate CIMI.


Documentation and User Support
------------------------------

The current documentation for the StratusLab distribution is available
[here][docs] and along side the [code][github].  The guides will
become the definitive format for the documentation over the next few
releases.  Comments on the organization and content are particularly
welcome.

Please visit the [StratusLab User Forums][forum] where you can report
problems, give feedback and discuss StratusLab and Cloud-related
issues with StratusLab project members and users.

Alternatively, [contact us][about] if you have questions or feedback
on the StratusLab distribution.


ChangeLog for StratusLab v13.10.0
---------------------------------

This provides a more detailed list of changes in v13.10.0 from the
previous release v13.05.  The numbers refer to GitHub issues that may
provide further information on any given change.

### Marketplace

* Improvements to display and messages (marketplace #12, #16)
* Investigation of alternative database backends (marketplace #14, #15)

### Client

* image create fails when pdisk is not on FE (client #97)
* remove stratus-save-instance command (client #94)
* create runner interface for mult. implementations (client #93)
* create interface for volume management (client #91)
* remove notification feature (clien t#90)
* data files missing form pypi package (client #89)
* remove couchbase dep. from pypi package (client #87)
* remove couchbase dep. from repository (client #86)
* remove command line emphasis (client #84)

### Storage

* X509 proxies use wrong username (storage #40)
* attaching volume to CentOS 6.4 fails (storage #39)
* unable to hotplug disks when virtio is used (storage #24)

### Registration

* update to jetty 9 (registration #6)
* add missing java dependency (registration #5)

### CIMI

* prototype version of CIMI server available

### Monitoring

* prototype version of resource monitoring and consolidation
  of information


[sl-yum]: http://yum.stratuslab.eu/releases/
[docs]: http://stratuslab.eu/documentation
[github]: http://github.com/StratusLab
[forum]: https://groups.google.com/a/stratuslab.eu/group/user-forum/topics
[about]: http://stratuslab.eu/about
