---
layout: article
title: StratusLab Release Candidate (13.05.0.RC1)
category: news
---

A release candidate for **Version 13.05** of the StratusLab IaaS cloud
distribution is available.  This release incorporates a large number
of bug fixes; it also includes changes to facilitate the
implementation of the new StratusLab architecture.  The full changelog
is below.

In the next couple of weeks, the release will be certified and the
documentation updated.  The documentation will be reorganized into
User's, Administrator's, and Contributor's Guides, making finding the
right information easier.

The command line client is backwards-compatible with the 13.02
release, so you can already start using the new client with the
reference cloud infrastructure.  The preferred may to install the
client is via pip for individual installations; an RPM package is also
supported for system-wide installations.

Production sites should wait for the certified release.  Test sites
can help with the certification by installing the release and
providing feedback. Get the CentOS and OpenSuSE packages from the
[StratusLab yum repositories][sl-yum].


Documentation and User Support
------------------------------

The documentation has not yet been updated for this release.  It will
be reviewed and updated before the release is certified.  The current
documentation for the StratusLab distribution is available
[here][docs] and along side the [code][github].

Please visit the [StratusLab User Forums][forum] where you can report
problems, give feedback and discuss StratusLab and Cloud-related
issues with StratusLab project members and users.

Alternatively, [contact us][about] if you have questions or feedback
on the StratusLab distribution.


ChangeLog for StratusLab v13.05.0.RC1
-------------------------------------

This provides a more detailed list of changes in v13.05.0.RC1 from the
previous release v13.02.  The numbers refer to GitHub issues that may
provide further information on any given change.

### Marketplace

* Add ability to 'tag' a particular image (marketplace #9, #11)
* Remove redundant entries from duplicate metadata fields
  (marketplace #10) 
* Fix broken links on about page (marketplace #8)
* Simplify main search (marketplace #6)

### Metadata

* Add support for dcterms:alternative to support image tags
  (metadata #2) 


### Client

* simplify client commands/config. on VM hosts (client #74)
* use remote initialization of cached images (client #70)
* correct bugs in stratus-upload-image (client #67, #68)
* correct/improve command descriptions (client #52, #66)
* remove unimplemented stratus-save-instance command (client #65)
* fix incorrect import in stratus-policy-image (client #64)
* remove application benchmarks from code/dist. (client #63)
* use std. python logging facilities in code (client #62)
* provide/fix stratus-copy-config command (client #61)
* refactor client packages/remove unused code (client #54, #56, #57,
  and #58)
* fix readonly disk option (client #50)
* add support for couchbase to stratus-install (client #55)
* fix TMCloneCache script for storage changes (client #59, #60)
* workaround problem with dropped SSL handshakes (authn #3)


### OpenNebula

* ensure OpenNebula compiles on OpenSuSE 12.2 (one #4)


### Storage

* host attach/detach pdisk scripts removed (storage #10, #31, #37)
* fix upload function (storage #30)
* improve service reliability (storage #15)
* allow initialization of disk from URL (storage #32)


### Registration

* update package descriptors (registration #3)
* remove support for ApacheDS (registration #4)


### Authentication

* ensure service starts if certificates directory doesn't exist (authn #4)


### Documentation

* use title option in create image tutorial (web #12)


[sl-yum]: http://yum.stratuslab.eu/releases/
[image-create-doc]: http://stratuslab.eu/documentation/2013/01/31/docs-image-use-and-creation.html
[ci-docs]: https://help.ubuntu.com/community/CloudInit
[cloudinit-doc]: http://stratuslab.eu/documentation/2013/01/31/docs-cloud-init.html
[docs]: http://stratuslab.eu/documentation
[github]: http://github.com/StratusLab
[forum]: https://groups.google.com/a/stratuslab.eu/group/user-forum/topics
[about]: http://stratuslab.eu/about
