---
layout: article
title: StratusLab Release (13.05.0)
category: news
---

The 13.05.0 release of the StratusLab IaaS cloud distribution is
available.  This release incorporates a large number of bug fixes; it
also includes changes to facilitate the implementation of the new
StratusLab architecture.  The full changelog is below.

The documentation has been reorganized starting with this release into
User's, Administrator's, and Contributor's Guides.  These are still
works-in-progress, but hopefully it will make finding the right
information quicker and easier.  The User's guide is fairly complete,
the others will be completed as we work towards the next release
(expected at the end of August).

The command line client is backwards-compatible with the 13.02
release, so you can already start using the new client with the
reference cloud infrastructure.  The preferred way to install the
client is via pip for individual installations; an RPM package is also
supported for system-wide installations.

Production sites should upgrade to this release.  It should require
only the installation of the updated packages.  Get the CentOS and
OpenSuSE packages from the [StratusLab yum repositories][sl-yum].  We
will announce when the reference cloud infrastuctures at LAL and GRNET
will be upgraded.


Documentation and User Support
------------------------------

The current documentation for the StratusLab distribution is available
[here][docs] and along side the [code][github].  The guides will
become the definitive format for the documentation over the next few
releases.  Comments on the organization and content are particularly
welcome.

Please visit the [StratusLab User Forums][forum] where you can report
problems, give feedback and discuss StratusLab and Cloud-related
issues with StratusLab project members and users.

Alternatively, [contact us][about] if you have questions or feedback
on the StratusLab distribution.


ChangeLog for StratusLab v13.05.0
---------------------------------

This provides a more detailed list of changes in v13.05.0 from the
previous release v13.02.  The numbers refer to GitHub issues that may
provide further information on any given change.

### Marketplace

* Add ability to 'tag' a particular image (marketplace #9, #11)
* Remove redundant entries from duplicate metadata fields
  (marketplace #10) 
* Fix broken links on about page (marketplace #8)
* Simplify main search (marketplace #6)

### Metadata

* Add support for dcterms:alternative to support image tags
  (metadata #2) 

### Client

* simplify client commands/config. on VM hosts (client #74)
* use remote initialization of cached images (client #70)
* correct bugs in stratus-upload-image (client #67, #68)
* correct/improve command descriptions (client #52, #66)
* remove unimplemented stratus-save-instance command (client #65)
* fix incorrect import in stratus-policy-image (client #64)
* remove application benchmarks from code/dist. (client #63)
* use std. python logging facilities in code (client #62)
* provide/fix stratus-copy-config command (client #61)
* refactor client packages/remove unused code (client #54, #56, #57,
  and #58)
* fix readonly disk option (client #50)
* add support for couchbase to stratus-install (client #55)
* fix TMCloneCache script for storage changes (client #59, #60)
* workaround problem with dropped SSL handshakes (authn #3)


### OpenNebula

* ensure OpenNebula compiles on OpenSuSE 12.2 (one #4)


### Storage

* host attach/detach pdisk scripts removed (storage #10, #31, #37)
* fix upload function (storage #30)
* improve service reliability (storage #15)
* allow initialization of disk from URL (storage #32)


### Registration

* update package descriptors (registration #3)
* remove support for ApacheDS (registration #4)


### Authentication

* ensure service starts if certificates directory doesn't exist (authn #4)


### Documentation

* use title option in create image tutorial (web #12)


[sl-yum]: http://yum.stratuslab.eu/releases/
[image-create-doc]: http://stratuslab.eu/documentation/2013/01/31/docs-image-use-and-creation.html
[ci-docs]: https://help.ubuntu.com/community/CloudInit
[cloudinit-doc]: http://stratuslab.eu/documentation/2013/01/31/docs-cloud-init.html
[docs]: http://stratuslab.eu/documentation
[github]: http://github.com/StratusLab
[forum]: https://groups.google.com/a/stratuslab.eu/group/user-forum/topics
[about]: http://stratuslab.eu/about
