---
layout: article
title: StratusLab Release (14.06.0)
category: news
---

The 14.06.0 release of the StratusLab IaaS cloud distribution is
available.  This release uses a new proxy deployment architecture and
uses non-root users for most daemons.  A number of bug fixes are also
included in this release.

This release requires an upgrade to the client as well as
configuration changes for the new endpoints.  See the User Tutorial
for for details.

Production sites should upgrade to this release.  It should require
only the installation of the updated packages, although you may need
to carefully check directory permissions if daemons fail to start.
Get the CentOS packages from the [StratusLab yum
repositories][sl-yum].

The reference cloud infrastructure is already running a release
candidate of 14.06 and will be updated to this final version shortly.


Documentation and User Support
------------------------------

The StratusLab documentation has moved to [ReadTheDocs.org][slrtd].  A
link to this site is available from the usual StratusLab website.  The
hope is that this will make the documentation more visible and easier
to use.  Feedback on this change as well as on the contents is
welcome.

The User Tutorial and Administrator Tutorial are up-to-date with this
release.  The longer guides contain some useful information, but
contain a mix of information from previous releases and planned
services for 14.09.0.  If in doubt about information in the guides,
please ask on the [support mailing list][support].

Alternatively, [contact us][about] if you have questions or feedback
on the StratusLab distribution.  You can use the [support mailing
list][support] to get help. 


ChangeLog for StratusLab v14.06.0
---------------------------------

This provides a more detailed list of changes in v14.06.0 from the
previous release v14.03.0.  The numbers refer to GitHub issues that
may provide further information on any given change.

### Authentication

* add chkconfig/service handling in RPM (authn #10)

### CIMI

* add chkconfig/service handling in RPM (authn #9)

### Client

* update metadata dependency (client #126)
* fix stratus-install error message (client #128)
* fix accounting script unit tests (client #132)
* changes to fix problems when percent is in password (client #134, #135)
* CloudInit contextualization should send SSH key by default
    (client #137, #139, #142)
* add configuration parameter to change default contextualization
    method (client #140)
* add CLI list and show commands for marketplace (client #144)

### Marketplace

* add chkconfig/service handling in RPM (marketplace #37)
* remove about (marketplace #31) and query (marketplace #32) pages
* use non-root user for daemon (marketplace #33)
* create new route for tags (marketplace #35)
* remove conflicting SLF4J files in war (marketplace #34)

### Registration

* add chkconfig/service handling in RPM (registration #15)
* use non-root user for daemon (registration #11)
* URL for creating new user is wrong (registration #14)

### Storage

* add chkconfig/service handling in RPM (storage #49)

### Use Cases

* create use cases for libcloud (usecases #7)

### OpenNebula

* add chkconfig/service handling in RPM (one #6)

### Metadata

* reactivate findbugs checking; fix issues (metadata #4)
* remove direct dependency on SLF4J impl. (metadata #3)

### Standard Image Recipes

* enabled EPEL repository (image-recipes #12)
* fix CloudInit for CentOS (image-recipes #14)
* run contextualization only once on ubuntu (image-recipes #15)
* reduce startup timeouts for CloudInit (image-recipes #17)


[sl-yum]: http://yum.stratuslab.eu/releases/
[docs]: http://stratuslab.eu/documentation
[github]: http://github.com/StratusLab
[slrtd]: http://stratuslab.rtfd.org/
[forum]: https://groups.google.com/a/stratuslab.eu/group/user-forum/topics
[about]: http://stratuslab.eu/about
