---
layout: article
title: StratusLab Release (13.12.0)
category: news
---

The 13.12.0 release of the StratusLab IaaS cloud distribution is
available.  This release incorporates a number of bug fixes.  

The command line client is backwards-compatible with previous
releases.  The preferred way to install the client is via pip for
individual installations; an RPM package is also supported for
system-wide installations.

Production sites should upgrade to this release.  It should require
only the installation of the updated packages.  Get the CentOS
packages from the [StratusLab yum repositories][sl-yum].


Documentation and User Support
------------------------------

The current documentation for the StratusLab distribution is available
[here][docs] and along side the [code][github].  The guides will
become the definitive format for the documentation over the next few
releases.  The documents provide information for the current standard
services as well as preliminary information for prototype services.

Please visit the [StratusLab User Forums][forum] where you can report
problems, give feedback and discuss StratusLab and Cloud-related
issues with StratusLab project members and users.

Alternatively, [contact us][about] if you have questions or feedback
on the StratusLab distribution.


ChangeLog for StratusLab v13.12.0
---------------------------------

This provides a more detailed list of changes in v13.12.0 from the
previous release v13.10.0.  The numbers refer to GitHub issues that
may provide further information on any given change.

### Marketplace

* resolve issue with SSL on CentOS 6.5 (marketplace #20)
* remove created metadata files for tests (marketplace #19)
* implement Marketplace replication (marketplace #18)
* add support for private Marketplace type (marketplace #17)

### Client

* fix run instance failure because of caching (client #106)
* correct http error status handling (client #103)
* set owner and metadata correctly for cached images (client #102)
* update email notification for created images (client #101)
* correct import in quarantine script (client #100)
* fix incorrect imports for storage scripts (client #99)
* fix import for stratus-delete-volume (client #98)
* remove unnecessary dependencies for sysadmin CLI (client #35)

### Storage

* resolve issue with SSL on CentOS 6.5 (storage #44)
* make configuration robust against missing sections (storage #43)
* correct error reporting in backend (storage #42)

### CIMI

* fix issue with SSL on CentOS 6.5 (cimi #4)
* fix build issue with maven 2.2.1 (cimi #3)

### Image Recipes

* rebooting image resets authorized ssh keys (image-recipes #13)

### Authentication

* fix issue with SSL on CentOS 6.5 (authn #5)

### Libcloud Drivers

* upgrade to latest version of libcloud (libcloud-drivers #2, #5)
* change status to production (libcloud-drivers #3)
* ensure size is a long value (libcloud-drivers #4)

[sl-yum]: http://yum.stratuslab.eu/releases/
[docs]: http://stratuslab.eu/documentation
[github]: http://github.com/StratusLab
[forum]: https://groups.google.com/a/stratuslab.eu/group/user-forum/topics
[about]: http://stratuslab.eu/about
