---
layout: article
title: StatusLab Demo
category: documentation
---

This article provides a short demonstration of the core functionality
of the StratusLab cloud distribution.

Client Installation
===================

The StratusLab command line client is written mostly in Python except
for a small part (related to XML cryptographic signatures) written in
Java.  End-users should use the Python package installer (`pip`) to
install the client on their machines.

The client is fully supported on unix-like operating systems such as
Linux and Mac OS X.  The core functionality of the command line
interface also work on Windows.  However, this OS is less tested and
there are several commands which do not work.  (These will be pointed
out in the documentation.)

Prerequisites
-------------

Your machine must have the following software installed and
configured: 

  * Python 2 (2.6+)
  * `pip` and optionally `virtualenv`
  * Java 1.6+
  * SSH client with an SSH keypair
  * Web browser

All of the supported platforms have widely available versions of
Python and Java available.  Linux and Mac machines already have an SSH
client installed; Windows users can download Putty.  Windows users
will also need to ensure that PowerShell (or another shell) is
installed. 

For the Java dependency any certified version of Java 1.6 or later
will work.  Notably the versions OpenJDK and Oracle are known to work.
The java compiler from Gnu (`gjc`) does **not** work and should never
be used.

Command Line Client Installation
--------------------------------

A single command can be used to install the StratusLab client and all
of the required dependencies:

    $ pip install stratuslab-client

By default, `pip` will install the software in the system area to make
it available for all users on the system.  If you don't have the
rights to do this, then you can do a user-level installation:

    $ pip install --user stratuslab-client

But in this case, you will need to add the appropriate directories to
your path, adding for example, a line like:

    PATH=$PATH:$HOME/.local/bin

to your `.bash_profile` file (or the equivalent for whatever shell
you are using). 

If the latest version is a beta or release candidate, then for newer
versions of `pip` you will have to use the `--pre` option to allow
pre-release versions to be installed.


Command Line Configuration
--------------------------

You must configure the command line client, giving the service
endpoints for the StratusLab cloud and your credentials.

First, create your configuration file by running the following
command:

    $ stratus-copy-config

This will create the file `$HOME/.stratuslab/stratuslab-user.cfg`.
You will now need to edit this file to provide the required
information.  The file itself is extensively commented, showing all of
the available options.

Your file should look like the following:

    [default]

    selected_section = sl-cloud

    endpoint_timeout = 5

    [sl-cloud]

    name = "StratusLab Cloud"
    country = "France"

    endpoint = https://cloud.lal.stratuslab.eu/one-proxy/xmlrpc
    pdisk_endpoint = https://pdisk.lal.stratuslab.eu/pdisk
    marketplace_endpoint = https://marketplace.stratuslab.eu/marketplace

    username = user01
    password = ....

NOTE: Replace the username and password with the values you used when
you registered for the cloud infrastructure or that you were assigned.

NOTE: If your password (or any other value) contains a percent sign
(%), you must double that character in the configuration file.  This
is because the Python software used to read the configuration files
allows variable substitution with the syntax `%(variable)`. 


Testing the Client
------------------

To test that the client is functioning correctly and can contact the
cloud services, run the following commands. 

    $ stratus-describe-instance
    $ stratus-describe-volumes

These should return an empty list of virtual machines and of volumes,
respectively. 


Getting Help
------------

All of the StratusLab commands provide extensive information about
their use and their options.  To see the help for a given command, do
the following:

    $ stratus-run-instance --help

All of the StratusLab command support this option.

In addition, all of the commands support the `--version` option which
will return the version number of the client being used. 


StratusLab Marketplace
======================

All of the available virtual machine images (or appliances) are
registered in the StratusLab Marketplace.  These include standard
images created and maintained by the StratusLab developers and others
created by StratusLab users.

Use your web browser to view the available appliances by navigating to
the central [Marketplace](https://marketplace.stratuslab.eu/).  You
can find the standard images from StratusLab by putting
"images@stratuslab.eu" into the "endorser" field on the right side of
the interface.

The summary contains the basic information for an appliance along with
a link to find more information.  The most imporant bit of information
is the **image identifier**.  This is a 27 character Base 64 value
that uniquely identifies the appliance.  This identifier is used to
select the appliance you want to run as a virtual machine.

StratusLab provides minimal distributions of CentOS 6, ScientificLinux
6, Ubuntu 12.04, and Ubuntu 14.03.  These follow the best practices
for appliance creation and are kept up to date with security patches.
They make good bases for creating your own applications. 


Virtual Machine Lifecycle
=========================

Lifecycle Commands
------------------

The virtual machine lifecycle consists of the following commands:

    $ stratus-run-instance ${APP_ID}
    $ stratus-describe-instance
    $ stratus-connect-instance ${VM_ID} or ssh root@${VM_IP}
    $ stratus-kill-instance

These commands start, list, access, and destroy a virtual machine,
respectively.

NOTE: The `stratus-connect-instance` command does not work on
Windows.  Use your local SSH command or application to connect to your
virtual machine.  

NOTE: The `stratus-kill-instance` stops a running virtual machine
instantly.  This is the equivalent of pulling out the plug.  A more
graceful shutdown should be done in most cases where the machine is
halted (from within the machine) before running this command.

Choose one of the standard appliances and use these commands to go
through the workflow. 


Changing Allocated Resources
----------------------------

The resources allocated to virtual machines can be changed with
options _at deployment time_.  A set of predefined "machine types"
provide some default configurations.

You can see the predefined configurations with the command:

    $ stratus-run-instance --list-types

The values for the CPU, RAM (MiB), and SWAP (MiB) space are listed for
each type with the default type marked with an asterisk.  You can
change which type is selected by using the `--type` option when
starting a virtual machine.

Fine-grained control over the resource allocation is also possible.
The options `--cpu`, `--ram`, and `--swap` allow you to set values
separately.  For values that are not specified explicitly, the value
will be taken from the selected machine type.


Contextualization
-----------------

Contextualization is the process by which a virtual machine discovers
characteristics of its environment and properly configures itself.
This is used, for example, for network configuration but can also be
used for user-level service configuration.

StratusLab supports two types of contextualization: OpenNebula
contextualization through a CD-ROM image and CloudInit
contextualization via a VFAT image.  The OpenNebula method is the
default.  The CloudInit contextualization is more flexible.

See the documentation for the details on the CloudInit options. 


Persistent Disk Lifecycle
=========================

StratusLab also provides persistent storage for its users.  This
storage is in the form of raw block devices (volumes).  These volumes
can be used by virtual machines, but have a lifecycle that is
independent of them. 

The limitations of persistent disks are:

  * They are raw block devices and must be initialized when first used
    on a virtual machine.
  * They can only be used on one virtual machine at a time (just like
    physical disks).

StratusLab does not natively provide file or object-based storage
services. 


Lifecycle
---------

The commands for a persistent disk lifecycle are:

    $ stratus-create-volume --size ${GiB} --tag ${MY_DESC}
    $ stratus-describe-volumes
    $ stratus-delete-volume ${VOLUME_UUID}

The size of the volume is given in Gibibytes (GiB).  The tag is
optional, but useful when trying to distinguish several different
volumes. 

Run through the persistent disk lifecycle with the command line
interface. 


Web Interface
-------------

There is also a web interface for this service.  You can perform the
same actions via your web browser.  Try running through the same
lifecycle with the web interface.

NOTE: That the web interface will change significantly in the coming
releases.

  
Using Persistent Disks and VMs Together
=======================================

Create a persistent disk and then run a machine using this persistent
disk. 

    $ stratus-run-instance --persistent-disk=${VOLUME_UUID} ${APP_ID}

when the virtual machine starts the persistent disk will be attached
to the machine.   You can find the device name for the disk by using
the command `fdisk -l`.   (Look for a disk without a partition table
and that has the same size as your disk.)

Optionally partition (`fdisk`) and format the disk.  Normally, there
is no need to partition the disk, unless you need more than one file
system on the disk.

To format the disk, use the command `mkfs.ext4` and then provide a
label for the file system.  The label will allow you to more easily
mount the volume in the future without needing to know the device name
assigned by the virtualization layer.

    $ mkfs.ext4
    $ e2label /dev/vdc mylabel

NOTE: The formatting of the disk should only be done **once**.  If you
reformat the disk, all of the existing data will be lost.

Now mount the disk and store some data. 

    $ mkdir /mnt/pdisk
    $ mount --label mylabel /mnt/pdisk
    $ ls /mnt/pdisk

Shutdown the machine and then start another machine using this disk.
Verify that the data you saved on the previous machine is still
there. 


Dynamic Mounting of Disks
-------------------------

When you use the `--persistent-disk` option of `stratus-run-instance`,
the volume will be assigned to that virtual machine for its entire
lifetime.  You can however, attach and detach disks dynamically from
running virtual machines.

In this case, start a virtual machine and wait until it is accessible
via ssh.  Now use the `stratus-attach-volume` command to attach the
disk to the virtual machine.  Verify from within the virtual machine
that the disk has been attached and is visible.

After this, unmount the disk from the file system and then use the
`stratus-detach-volume` to remove the volume from the virtual
machine.  Verify from within the virtual machine that the disk as
indeed be detached.

Even though modern file systems are tolerant of abrupt deconnections
of the device, it is always a good idea to unmount the disk from the
file system from within the virtual machine before detaching the disk
with the command. 

NOTE: A volume can be mounted only on one virtual machine at a time.
Try to mount a volume on more than one machine to see what error
message is given. 


Alternate Storage Types
=======================

Volatile Storage
----------------

Used for the storage of large _temporary_ data files.  The data will
disappear when the VM instance is destroyed.

When starting a virtual machine a volatile disk can be added to the
machine using the `--volatile-disk` option.  You must provide the size
(in GiB) of the disk.

NOTE:  The disks are not formatted!  So you'll need to format and
mount the disk.  You can find the disk with the `fdisk -l` command.

Exercise: Use a volatile disk and store some data on it.  Verify that
the data will survive a **reboot** of the machine.  The data will
**not** survive the shutdown of the machine.


Static Disks
------------

Used for the distribution and caching of fixed/versioned data.  Takes
advantage of disk caching mechanisms of StratusLab for efficient
access. 

When starting a virtual machine a static (read-only) disk can be
attached.  These disks are declared in the Marketplace and have
a Marketplace identifier.  The option to use is `--readonly-disk` with
the Marketplace identifier. 

The disk will appear in the virtual machine exactly as it has been
formatted in the reference image.  Usually these images are formatted
as a CD-ROM (or DVD) image so that they are portable between different
operating systems.

When creating such images it is strongly recommended that they be
created with a label so that they can easily be mounted by the user
without needing to know what device has been assigned.

Search for the "Flora and Fauna" image in the Marketplace.  Start a
virtual machine with this image and verify that 1) the information can
be read, 2) that it is indeed read-only, and 3) you can serve this
information via a web server. 


Creating New Appliances
=======================

By far the easiest way to create a new appliance is to base it on an
existing one.  The StratusLab tools make this easy to do (although it
still takes time to make copies of the images).

The command that automates the full process is
`stratus-create-image`.  This has numerous options, most of which are
required to create the Marketplace manifest for the image. 

    $ stratus-create-image \
        --author-email builder@example.org \
        --author='Joe Builder' \
        --image-group base \
        --image-version 1.1 \
        --title 'Short Title' \
        --comment "Longer description of image." \
        ${BASE_APP_ID}

The resulting image will be registered in the Marketplace (with a
short-lived, temporary endorsement); the Marketplace manifest will
also be emailed to you with instructions for creating a longer-lived
endorsement of the image.

You can also customize this image through the contextualization
process.  Using CloudInit contextualization is more convenient for
this. 

