---
layout: article
title: StratusLab Release (14.03.0)
category: news
---

The 14.03.0 release of the StratusLab IaaS cloud distribution is
available.  This release incorporates a number of bug fixes.  

The command line client is backwards-compatible with previous
releases.  The preferred way to install the client is via pip for
individual installations; an RPM package is also supported for
system-wide installations.

Production sites should upgrade to this release.  It should require
only the installation of the updated packages.  Get the CentOS
packages from the [StratusLab yum repositories][sl-yum].

The reference cloud infrastructure will be updated to this release in
the next few weeks.  The standard images will also be upgraded shortly.


Documentation and User Support
------------------------------

The current documentation for the StratusLab distribution is available
[here][docs] and along side the [code][github].  The guides will
become the definitive format for the documentation over the next few
releases.  The documents provide information for the current standard
services as well as preliminary information for prototype services.

Please visit the [StratusLab User Forums][forum] where you can report
problems, give feedback and discuss StratusLab and Cloud-related
issues with StratusLab project members and users.

Alternatively, [contact us][about] if you have questions or feedback
on the StratusLab distribution.


ChangeLog for StratusLab v14.03.0
---------------------------------

This provides a more detailed list of changes in v14.03.0 from the
previous release v13.12.0.  The numbers refer to GitHub issues that
may provide further information on any given change.

### Authentication

* create cloud group on package install (authn #7)

### CIMI

* ensure service files are not cleaned up by tmpwatch (cimi #5)
* use consistent behavior of init.d script (cimi #6)

### Client

* fix missing requests dependency (client #111)
* support easy_install locations for data files (client #114)
* add search paths for metadata template and jar (client #115)
* fix unicode handling for xml in etree (client #118, #122)
* fix mapping for lvm/iscsi storage backend (client #120)
* fix sudoers rights for disk management scripts (client #121)
* add missing dependency for cloud-init (client #123)

### Libcloud Drivers

* fix error in create_node function (libcloud-drivers #6)

### Marketplace

* files retrieve in initial clone are pushed (marketplace #21)
* allow for ssh authn with git (marketplace #22)
* update java to 1.7.0 (marketplace #23)
* use consistent behavior of init.d script (marketplace #26, #29)
* create certificate on startup (marketplace #27)

### Registration

* upgrade from java 1.6 to 1.7 (registration #8)
* ensure service files are not cleaned up by tmpwatch (registration #9)
* use consistent behavior of init.d script (registration #10)

### Storage

* ensure service files are not cleaned up by tmpwatch (storage #46)
* use consistent behavior of init.d script (storage #47)

### Use Cases

* remove client and libcloud dependencies (usecases #9)
* remove stratus-download-image test (usecases #10)


[sl-yum]: http://yum.stratuslab.eu/releases/
[docs]: http://stratuslab.eu/documentation
[github]: http://github.com/StratusLab
[forum]: https://groups.google.com/a/stratuslab.eu/group/user-forum/topics
[about]: http://stratuslab.eu/about
